Habakkuk
1770
Habakkuk Complains to the Lord
1:1 The following is the message
 which God 
revealed to Habakkuk the prophet:
1:2 How long, Lord, must I cry for help? 
But you do not listen!
I call out to you, “Violence!” 
But you do not intervene!
1:3 Why do you force me to witness in- justice?
Why do you put up with wrongdoing?
Destruction and violence confront
 me;
conflict is present and one must endure 
strife.
1:4 For this reason the law lacks power,
and justice is never carried out.
Indeed,10
 the wicked intimidate11 the in- nocent.12
For this reason justice is perverted.13
The Lord Reveals Some Startling News
1:5 “Look at the nations and pay atten- tion!14
You will be shocked and amazed!15
 tn Heb “The burden” (so KJV, ASV). The Hebrew term א ָּׂש ַמ
(masa’), usually translated “oracle” (NAB, NEB, NASB, NIV, 
NRSV) or “utterance” (BDB 672 s.v. III א ָּׂש ַמ(, in prophetic literature is a technical term introducing a message from the
Lord (see Zech 9:1; 12:1; Mal 1:1). Since it derives from a 
verb meaning “to carry,” its original nuance was that of a burdensome message, that is, one with ominous content.  tn Heb “The message [traditionally, “burden”] which Habakkuk the prophet saw.”  tn Or “deliver.”  tn Heb “Why do you make me see injustice?”  tn Heb “Why do you look at wrongdoing?”
sn Habakkuk complains that God tolerates social injustice
and fails to intervene on behalf of the oppressed (put up with 
wrongdoing).  tn Heb “are before.”  tn Heb “and there is conflict and strife he lifts up.” The 
present translation takes the verb א ָּׂשִי) yisa’) in the sense of
“carry, bear,” and understands the subject to be indefinite 
(“one”).
 tn Heb “the law is numb,” i.e., like a hand that has “fallen
asleep” (see Ps 77:2). Cf. NAB “is benumbed”; NIV “is paralyzed.”
 tn Heb “never goes out.” 10 tn Or “for.” 11 tn Heb “surround” (so NASB, NRSV). 12 tn Or “righteous” (KJV, NASB, NIV, NRSV, NLT). 13 tn Heb “comes out crooked.” 14 tn Or “look among the nations and observe.” The imperatival forms in v. 5 are plural, indicating that the Lord’s message is for the whole nation, not just the prophet. 15 tn The Hebrew text combines the Hitpael and Qal imperatival forms of the verb ה ַמ ָּת) tamah, “be amazed”). A literal
translation might read, “Shock yourselves and be shocked!” 
The repetition of sounds draws attention to the statement.
The imperatives here have the force of an emphatic assertion. On this use of the imperative in Hebrew, see GKC 324 
§110.c and IBHS 572-73 §34.4c.
For I will do something in your lifetime16
that you will not believe even though you 
are forewarned.17
1:6 Look, I am about to empower18 the 
Babylonians,
that ruthless19 and greedy20
 nation.
They sweep across the surface21 of the 
earth,
seizing dwelling places that do not be- long to them.
1:7 They are frightening and terrifying;
they decide for themselves what is right.22
1:8 Their horses are faster than leopards
and more alert23 than wolves in the des- ert.24
Their horses25 gallop,26
their horses come a great distance;
like a vulture27 they swoop down quickly 
to devour their prey.28
1:9 All of them intend29 to do violence;
16 tc Heb “for a work working in your days.” Following the 
LXX reading, some supply a first person singular pronoun with 
the participle ל ֵעֹ ּפ) po’el). Ellipsis of a first singular pronoun before participles is relatively rare (see GKC 360 §116.s); perhaps an original י ִכֹנֲא‘) anoki; orיִנֲא,‘ aniy) followed the initial י ִּכ
(ki) and was omitted by homoioteleuton. 17 tn Heb “you will not believe when it is told.” In this context 
the force of י ִּכ) ki) may be “when,” “if,” or “even though.” 18 tn Heb “raise up” (so KJV, ASV). 19 tn Heb “bitter.” Other translation options for this word in
this context include “fierce” (NASB, NRSV); “savage” (NEB); 
or “grim.”
20 tn Heb “hasty, quick.” Some translate here “impetuous” 
(so NEB, NASB, NIV, NRSV) or “rash,” but in this context greed 
may very well be the idea. The Babylonians move quickly and
recklessly ahead in their greedy quest to expand their empire.
21 tn Heb “the open spaces.” 22 tn Heb “from him his justice, even his lifting up, goes
out.” In this context ת ֵא ְׂש) sÿ’et) probably has the nuance “authority.” See R. D. Patterson, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah
(WEC), 150.
23 tn Heb “sharper,” in the sense of “keener” or “more
alert.” Some translate “quicker” on the basis of the parallelism with the first line (see HALOT 291 s.v. חדד(. 24 tn Heb “wolves of the evening,” that is, wolves that prowl
at night. The present translation assumes an emendation to
ה ָב ָרֲע‘) aravah, “desert”). On this phrase see also Zeph 3:3. 25 tn Or “horsemen,” “cavalry.” 26 tn The precise nuance of the rare verb ׁשַו ָּפ) parash) is unclear here. Elsewhere it is used of animals jumping or leaping
(see Jer 50:11; Mal 4:2). 27 tn Or “eagle” (so NASB, NRSV). The term can refer to either eagles or vultures, but in this context of gruesome destruction and death “vulture” is preferred. 28 tn Heb “they fly like a vulture/an eagle quickly to devour.” 
The direct object “their prey” is not included in the Hebrew
text but is implied, and has been supplied in the translation 
for clarity.
29 tn Heb “come.”
every face is determined.
They take prisoners as easily as one 
scoops up sand.
1:10 They mock kings
and laugh at rulers.
They laugh at every fortified city;
they build siege ramps
 and capture them.
1:11 They sweep by like the wind and 
pass on.
But the one who considers himself a god 
will be held guilty.”
Habakkuk Voices Some Concerns
1:12 Lord, you have been active from 
ancient times;
my sovereign God,
 you are immortal.
Lord, you have made them
 your instru- ment of judgment.10
Protector,11 you have appointed them as 
your instrument of punishment.12
 tn Heb “The totality of their faces is to the east” (or “is forward”). The precise meaning of the Hebrew term ת ַּמַג ְמ) megammat) is unclear. For a discussion of options see J. J. M. 
Roberts, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (OTL), 93. NEB 
has “a sea of faces rolls on”; NIV “their hordes advance like a
desert wind”; NRSV “with faces pressing forward.”
 tn Heb “and he gathers like sand, prisoners.”  tn Heb “they heap up dirt.” This is a reference to the piling up of earthen ramps in the process of laying siege to a
fortified city.
 tn The precise meaning of v. 11a is uncertain. The present translation assumes the first line further describes the 
Babylonian hordes, comparing them to a destructive wind.
Another option is to understand ַחּרו) ruakh) as “spirit,” rather
than “wind,” and take the form ם ֵ ׁש ָאְו) vÿ’ashem) with what precedes (as suggested by the scribal punctuation). Repointing
this form as a geminate verb from ם ַמ ָ ׁש) shamam, “be astonished”), one could then translate the line, “The spirit passed
on and departed, and I was astonished.” In this case the line
would describe the cessation of the divine revelation which
began in v. 5. For a detailed defense of this view, see J. J. M. 
Roberts, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (OTL), 97-100.  tn Heb “and guilty is the one whose strength is his god.”
This assumes that ם ֵ ׁש ָא‘) ashem) is a predicate adjective
meaning “guilty” and that it relates to what follows.  tn Heb “Are you not from antiquity, O Lord?” The rhetorical
question expects the answer, “Yes, of course.” The present 
translation reflects the force of the rhetorical question, rendering it as an affirmation. When used in a temporal sense 
the phrase ם ֶד ֶק ִמ) miqedem) means “from antiquity, ancient
times,” often referring to earlier periods in Israel’s history. See 
its use in Neh 12:46; Pss 74:12; 77:11; Isa 45:21; 46:10; Mic 
5:2.
 tn Heb “My God, my holy one.” God’s “holiness” in this
context is his sovereign transcendence as the righteous judge 
of the world (see vv. 12b-13a), thus the translation “My sovereign God.”  tc The MT reads, “we will not die,” but an ancient scribal
tradition has “you [i.e., God] will not die.” This is preferred as
a more difficult reading that can explain the rise of the other 
variant. Later scribes who copied the manuscripts did not 
want to associate the idea of death with God in any way, so
they softened the statement to refer to humanity.  tn Heb “him,” a collective singular referring to the Babylonians. The plural pronoun “them” has been used in the translation in keeping with contemporary English style. 10 tn Heb “for judgment.” 11 tn Heb “Rock” or “Cliff.” This divine epithet views God as 
a place where one can go to be safe from danger. The translation “Protector” conveys the force of the metaphor (cf. KJV,
NEB “O mighty God”). 12 tn Heb “to correct, reprove.”
1:13 You are too just13 to tolerate14 evil;
you are unable to condone15 wrongdoing.
So why do you put up with such treacher- ous people?16
Why do you say nothing when the wick- ed devour17 those more righteous than 
they are?18
1:14 You made people like fish in the sea,
like animals in the sea19 that have no 
ruler.
1:15 The Babylonian tyrant20
 pulls them 
all up with a fishhook;
he hauls them in with his throw net.21
When he catches22 them in his dragnet,
he is very happy.23
1:16 Because of his success24 he offers 
sacrifices to his throw net
and burns incense to his dragnet;25
for because of them he has plenty of 
food,26
and more than enough to eat.27
1:17 Will he then28 continue to fill and 
empty his throw net?29
13 tn Heb “[you] are too pure of eyes.” God’s “eyes” here
signifywhat he looks atwith approval. His “eyes” are “pure” in
that he refuses to tolerate any wrongdoing in his presence. 14 tn Heb “to see.” Here “see” is figurative for “tolerate,” 
“put up with.” 15 tn Heb “to look at.” Cf. NEB “who canst not countenance 
wrongdoing”; NASB “You can not look on wickedness with favor.”
16 tn Heb “Why do you look at treacherous ones?” The verb
דַג ָּב) bagad, “be treacherous”) is often used of those who are
disloyal or who violate agreements. See S. Erlandsson, TDOT
1:470-73.
17 tn Or “swallow up.” 18 tn Heb “more innocent than themselves.” 19 tn The Hebrew word ׂש ֶמ ֶר) remesh) usually refers to animals that creep, but here the referent seems to be marine
animals that glide through the water (note the parallelism in
the previous line). See also Ps 104:25.
20 tn Heb “he”; the referent (the Babylonian tyrant) has
been specified in the translation for clarity (cf. NASB “The 
Chaldeans”; NIV “The wicked foe”; NRSV “The enemy”). Babylonian imperialism is here compared to a professional fisherman who repeatedly brings in his catch and has plenty to eat. 21 tn Apparently two different types of fishing nets are referred to here. The ם ֶר ֵח) kherem, “throw net”) was used by fishermen standing on the shore (see Ezek 47:10), while the ־ ְכ ִמ
ת ֶר ֶמ) mikhmeret, “dragnet”) was used by men in a boat. See 
R. D. Patterson, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah (WEC), 165. 22 tn Heb “and he gathers.” 23 tn Heb “Therefore he is happy and rejoices.” Here two
synonyms are joined for emphasis. 24 tn Heb “therefore.” 25 sn The fishing implements (throw net and dragnet) represent Babylonian military might. The prophet depicts the
Babylonians as arrogantly worshiping their own power (sacrifices…burns incense, see also v. 11b). 26 tn Heb “for by them his portion is full [or, “fat”].” 27 tn Heb “and his food is plentiful [or, “fat”].” 28 tn Or “therefore.” 29 tn Heb “Will he then empty his throw net?” The words
“continue to fill and” are supplied in the translation for clarification.
1771 habakkuk 1:17
Will he always
 destroy
 nations and 
spare none?
2:1 I will stand at my watch post;
I will remain stationed on the city wall.
I will keep watching, so I can see what he 
says to me
and can know
 how I should answer
when he counters my argument.
The Lord Assures Habakkuk
2:2 The Lord responded:
“Write down this message!
 Record it 
legibly on tablets,
so the one who announces
 it may read it 
easily.10
2:3 For the message is a witness to what 
is decreed;11
it gives reliable testimony about how 
matters will turn out.12
Even if the message13 is not fulfilled right 
away, wait patiently;14
for it will certainly come to pass – it will 
not arrive late. 
2:4 Look, the one whose desires are not 
upright will faint from exhaustion,15
 tn Or “continually.”  tn Heb “kill.”  tn Or “without showing compassion.”  sn Habakkuk compares himself to a watchman stationed 
on the city wall who keeps his eyes open for approaching
messengers or danger.  tn The word “know” is supplied in the translation for clarification.
 tn Heb “concerning my correction [or, “reproof”].”  tn Heb “the Lord answered and said.” The redundant
expression “answered and said” has been simplified in the 
translation as “responded.”  tn Heb “[the] vision.”  tn Or “reads from.” 10 tn Heb “might run,” which here probably means “run
[through it quickly with one’s eyes],” that is, read it easily. 11 tn Heb “For the vision is still for the appointed time.” The 
Hebrew word דֹעו‘) od, “still”) is better emended to ד ֵע‘) ed, “witness”) in light of the parallelism (see the note on the word
“turn out” in the following line). The “appointed time” refers
to the time when the divine judgment anticipated in vv. 6-20
will be realized. 12 tn Heb “and a witness to the end and it does not lie.” The
Hebrew term ַח ֵפָי) yafeakh) has been traditionally understood
as a verb form from the root ַחּו ּפ) puakh, “puff, blow”; cf. NEB
“it will come in breathless haste”; NASB “it hastens toward 
the goal”) but recent scholarship has demonstrated that it is
actually a noun meaning “witness” (cf. NIV “it speaks of the
end / and will not prove false”; NRSV “it speaks of the end, 
and does not lie”). See J. J. M. Roberts, Nahum, Habakkuk, 
and Zephaniah (OTL), 106. “The end” corresponds to “the 
appointed time” of the preceding line and refers to the time
when the prophecy to follow will be fulfilled.
13 tn Heb “it”; the referent (the message) has been specified in the translation for clarity.
14 tn Heb “If it should delay, wait for it.” The Hebrew word
ןֹזו ָח) khazon, “vision, message”) is the subject of the third person verbs in v. 3 and the antecedent of the pronominal suffix 
in the phrase “for it.” 15 tn The meaning of this line is unclear, primarily because of the uncertainty surrounding the second word, ה ָל ְּפֲע
(’apÿlah). Some read this as an otherwise unattested verb 
ל ַפ ָע‘) afal, “swell”) from which are derived nouns meaning
“mound” and “hemorrhoid.” This “swelling” is then understood in an abstract sense, “swell with pride.” This would
yield a translation, “As for the proud, his desires are not right
but the person of integrity16 will live17 be- cause of his faithfulness.18
2:5 Indeed, wine will betray the proud, 
restless man!19
His appetite20
 is as big as Sheol’s;21
within him” (cf. NASB “as for the proud one”; NIV “he is puffed 
up”; NRSV “Look at the proud!”). A multitude of other interpretations of this line, many of which involve emendations of the
problematic form, may be found in the commentaries and periodical literature. The present translation assumes an emendation to a Pual form of the verb ף ַל ָע‘) alaf, “be faint, exhausted”). (See its use in the Pual in Isa 51:20, and in the Hitpael 
in Amos 8:13 and Jonah 4:8.) In the antithetical parallelism
of the verse, it corresponds to הָי ָח) khayah, “live”). The phrase
his upright not “,literally ,)bo nafsho yoshrah’ lo (לֹא יָשׁ ְ רָ ה נַפְ שׁ וֹ בּ וֹ
desire within him,” is taken as a substantival clause that contrastswith יק ִּד ַצ) tsadiq, “the righteous one”) and serves as the
subject of the preceding verb. Here ׁש ֶפֶנ) nefesh) is understood
in the sense of “desire” (see BDB 660-61 s.v. ׁש ֶפֶנ for a list of
passages where the word carries this sense). 16 tn Or “righteous.” The oppressed individuals mentioned
in 1:4 are probably in view here. 17 tn Or “will be preserved.” In the immediate context this 
probably refers to physical preservation through both the
present oppression and the coming judgment (see Hab 3:16-
19).
18 tn Or “loyalty”; or “integrity.” The Hebrew word הָנּמוֱא
(’emunah) has traditionally been translated “faith,” but the
term nowhere else refers to “belief” as such. When used of
human character and conduct it carries the notion of “honesty, integrity, reliability, faithfulness.” The antecedent of the
suffix has been understood in different ways. It could refer to 
God’s faithfulness, but in this case one would expect a first 
person suffix (the original form of the LXX has “my faithfulness” here). Others understand the “vision” to be the antecedent. In this case the reliability of the prophecy is in view.
For a statement of this view, see J. J. M. Roberts, Nahum, 
Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (OTL), 111-12. The present translation assumes that the preceding word “[the person of] integrity” is the antecedent. In this case the Lord is assuring
Habakkuk that those who are truly innocent will be preserved
through the coming oppression and judgment by their godly
lifestyle, for God ultimately rewards this type of conduct. In
contrast to these innocent people, those with impure desires
(epitomized by the greedy Babylonians; see v. 5) will not be
able to withstand God’s judgment (v. 4a). 19 tn Heb “Indeed wine betrays a proud man and he does
not dwell.” The meaning of the last verb, “dwell,” is uncertain.
Many take it as a denominative of the noun הָוָנ) navah, “dwelling place”). In this case it would carry the idea, “he does not
settle down,” and would picture the drunkard as restless (cf.
NIV “never at rest”; NASB “does not stay at home”). Some relate the verb to an Arabic cognate and translate the phrase as
“he will not succeed, reach his goal.”
sn The Babylonian tyrant is the proud, restless man described in this line as the last line of the verse, with its reference to the conquest of the nations, makes clear. Wine is
probably a metaphor for imperialistic success. The more success the Babylonians experience, the more greedy they become just as a drunkard wants more and more wine to satisfy
his thirst. But eventually this greed will lead to their downfall,
for God will not tolerate such imperialism and will judge the
Babylonians appropriately (vv. 6-20). 20 tn Heb “who opens wide like Sheol his throat.” Here ׁש ֶפֶנ
(nefesh) is understood in a physical sense, meaning “throat,”
which in turn is figurative for the appetite. See H. W. Wolff, 
Anthropology of the Old Testament, 11-12. 21 sn Sheol is the proper name of the subterranean world
which was regarded as the land of the dead. In ancient Canaanite thought Death was a powerful god whose appetite
was never satisfied. In the OT Sheol/Death, though not deified, is personified as greedy and as having a voracious appetite. See Prov 30:15-16; Isa 5:14; also see L. I. J. Stadelmann, 
The Hebrew Conception of the World, 168.
habakkuk 2:1 1772
like death, he is never satisfied.
He gathers
 all the nations;
he seizes
 all peoples.
The Proud Babylonians Are as Good as Dead
2:6 “But all these nations will someday 
taunt him
and ridicule him with proverbial sayings:
‘The one who accumulates what does not 
belong to him is as good as dead
(How long will this go on?)
 – he who gets rich by extortion!’
2:7 Your creditors will suddenly attack;
those who terrify you will spring into 
action,
and they will rob you.10
2:8 Because you robbed many countries,11
all who are left among the nations12 will 
rob you.
You have shed human blood 
and committed violent acts against lands, 
cities,13 and those who live in them.
2:9 The one who builds his house by un- just gain is as good as dead.14
He does this so he can build his nest way 
up high
and escape the clutches of disaster.15
 tn Heb “he gathers for himself.”  tn Heb “he collects for himself.”  tn Heb “Will not these, all of them, take up a taunt against
him…?” The rhetorical question assumes the response, “Yes,
they will.” The present translation brings out the rhetorical
force of the question by rendering it as an affirmation. 
 tn Heb “and a mocking song, riddles, against him? And
one will say.”  tn Heb “Woe [to] the one who increases [what is] not his.”
The Hebrew term יֹהו) hoy, “woe,” “ah”) was used in funeral laments and carries the connotation of death.  tn This question is interjected parenthetically, perhaps to
express rhetorically the pain and despair felt by the Babylonians’ victims.  tn Heb “and the one who makes himself heavy [i.e.,
wealthy] [by] debts.” Though only appearing in the first line, 
the term יֹהו) hoy) is to be understood as elliptical in the second line.  tn Heb “Will not your creditors suddenly rise up?” The rhetorical question assumes the response, “Yes, they will.” The
present translation brings out the rhetorical force of the question by rendering it as an affirmation. 
sn Your creditors will suddenly attack. The Babylonians are
addressed directly here. They have robbed and terrorized others, but now the situation will be reversed as their creditors
suddenly attack them.  tn Heb “[Will not] the ones who make you tremble
awake?”
10 tn Heb “and you will become their plunder.” 11 tn Or “nations.” 12 tn Or “peoples.” 13 tn Heb “because of the shed blood of humankind and
violence against land, city.” The singular forms ץ ֶר ֶא‘) erets,
“land”) and הָי ְר ִק) qiryah, “city”) are collective, referring to all
the lands and cities terrorized by the Babylonians. 14 tn Heb “Woe [to] the one who profits unjustly by evil unjust gain for his house.” On the term יֹהו) hoy) see the note on
the word “dead” in v. 6. 15 tn Heb “to place his nest in the heights in order to escape from the hand of disaster.”
sn Here the Babylonians are compared to a bird, perhaps
an eagle, that builds its nest in an inaccessible high place
where predators cannot reach it.
2:10 Your schemes will bring shame to 
your house.
Because you destroyed many nations, 
you will self-destruct.16
2:11 For the stones in the walls will cry 
out,
and the wooden rafters will answer back.17
2:12 The one who builds a city by blood- shed is as good as dead18 – he who starts19 a town by unjust deeds.
2:13 Be sure of this! The Lord who com- mands armies has decreed:
The nations’ efforts will go up in smoke; 
their exhausting work will be for noth- ing.20
2:14 For recognition of the Lord’s sover- eign majesty will fill the earth
just as the waters fill up the sea.21
2:15 “You who force your neighbor to 
drink wine22 are as good as dead23 – you who make others intoxicated by forc- ing them to drink from the bowl of your 
furious anger,24
so you can look at their genitals.25
2:16 But you will become drunk26 with 
shame, not majesty.27
16 tn Heb “you planned shame for your house, cutting off
many nations, and sinning [against] your life.” 17 sn The house mentioned in vv. 9-10 represents the Babylonian empire, which became great through imperialism.
Here the materials of this “house” (the stones in the walls,
the wooden rafters) are personified as witnesses who testify 
that the occupants have built the house through wealth stolen from others. 18 tn On the term יֹהו) hoy) see the note on the word “dead”
in v. 6. 19 tn Or “establishes”; or “founds.” 20 tn Heb “Is it not, look, from the Lord of hosts that the nations work hard for fire, and the peoples are exhausted for 
nothing?”
21 tn Heb “for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of 
the glory of the Lord, just as the waters cover over the sea.” 22 tn No direct object is present after “drink” in the Hebrew
text. “Wine” is implied, however, and has been supplied in the 
translation for clarity. 23 tn On the term יֹהו) hoy) see the note on the word “dead”
in v. 6. 24 tc Heb “pouring out your anger and also making drunk”;
or “pouring out your anger and [by] rage making drunk.” The
present translation assumes that the final khet (ח (on ַח ֵּפ ַס ְמ
(misapeakh, “pouring”) is dittographic and that the form
should actually be read ף ַּס ִמ) missaf, “from a bowl”).
sn Forcing them to drink from the bowl of your furious anger. The Babylonian’s harsh treatment of others is compared
to intoxicating wine which the Babylonians force the nations 
to drink so they can humiliate them. Cf. the imagery in Rev 
14:10.
25 tn Heb “their nakedness,” a euphemism.
sn Metaphor and reality are probably blended here. This
may refer to the practice of publicly humiliating prisoners of
war by stripping them naked. See J. J. M. Roberts, Nahum, 
Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (OTL), 124. 26 tn Heb “are filled.” The translation assumes the verbal 
form is a perfect of certitude, emphasizing the certainty of
Babylon’s coming judgment, which will reduce the majestic
empire to shame and humiliation. 27 tn Or “glory.”
1773 habakkuk 2:16
Now it is your turn to drink and expose 
your uncircumcised foreskin!
The cup of wine in the Lord’s right hand
is coming to you,
and disgrace will replace your majestic 
glory!
2:17 For you will pay in full for your vio- lent acts against Lebanon;
terrifying judgment will come upon you 
because of the way you destroyed the 
wild animals living there.
You have shed human blood
and committed violent acts against lands, 
cities, and those who live in them.
2:18 What good
 is an idol? Why would a 
craftsman make it?
What good is a metal image that gives 
misleading oracles?
Why would its creator place his trust in it
and make
 such mute, worthless things?
2:19 The one who says to wood, ‘Wake 
up!’ is as good as dead10
 – he who says11 to speechless stone, 
‘Awake!’
 tc Heb “drink, even you, and show the foreskin.” Instead of ל ֵר ָע ֵה) he’arel, “show the foreskin”) one of the Dead
Sea scrolls has ל ֵע ָר ֵה) hera’el, “stumble”). This reading also
has support from several ancient versions and is followed by
the NEB (“you too shall drink until you stagger”) and NRSV 
(“Drink, you yourself, and stagger”). For a defense of the Hebrew text, see P. D. Miller, Jr., Sin and Judgment in the Prophets, 63-64.
 sn The Lord’s right hand represents his military power. He
will force the Babylonians to experience the same humiliating 
defeat they inflicted on others.
 tn Heb “for the violence against Lebanon will cover you.”  tc The Hebrew appears to read literally, “and the violence
against the animals [which] he terrified.” The verb form י־ ִחְי
ן ַת) yÿkhitan) appears to be a Hiphil imperfect third masculine
singular with third feminine plural suffix (the antecedent being the animals) from ת ַת ָח) khatat, “be terrified”). The translation above follows the LXX and assumes a reading ָך ֶּת ִחְי
(yÿkhittekha, “[the violence against the animals] will terrify
you”; cf. NRSV “the destruction of the animals will terrify you”; 
NIV “and your destruction of animals will terrify you”). In this
case the verb is a Hiphil imperfect third masculine singular
with second masculine singular suffix (the antecedent being Babylon). This provides better symmetry with the preceding line, where Babylon’s violence is the subject of the verb
“cover.”
sn The language may anticipate Nebuchadnezzar’s utilization of trees from the Lebanon forest in building projects. 
Lebanon and its animals probably represent the western Palestinian states conquered by the Babylonians.  tn Or “of what value.”  tn Heb “so that the one who forms it fashions it?” Here י ִּכ
(ki) is taken as resultative after the rhetorical question. For 
other examples of this use, see R. J. Williams, Hebrew Syntax,
73, §450.
 tn Heb “or a metal image, a teacher of lies.” The words
“What good is” in the translation are supplied from the previous parallel line. “Teacher of lies” refers to the false oracles
that the so-called god would deliver through a priest. See J. J. 
M. Roberts, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (OTL), 126.  tn Heb “so that the one who forms his image trusts in it?”
As earlier in the verse, י ִּכ) ki) is resultative.  tn Heb “to make.” 10 tn Heb “Woe [to] the one who says.” On the term יֹהו) hoy)
see the note on the word “dead” in v. 6. 11 tn The words “he who says” in the translation are supplied from the previous parallel line.
Can it give reliable guidance?12
It is overlaid with gold and silver;
it has no life’s breath inside it.
2:20 But the Lord is in his majestic pal- ace.13
The whole earth is speechless in his pres- ence!”14
Habakkuk’s Vision of the Divine Warrior
3:1 This is a prayer of Habakkuk the 
prophet:15
3:2 Lord, I have heard the report of what 
you did;16
I am awed,17 Lord, by what you accom- plished.18
In our time19 repeat those deeds;20
in our time reveal them again.21
But when you cause turmoil, remember 
to show us mercy!22
3:3 God comes23 from Teman,24
12 tn Though the Hebrew text has no formal interrogative 
marker here, the context indicates that the statement should 
be taken as a rhetorical question anticipating the answer, “Of
course not!” (so also NIV, NRSV).
13 tn Or “holy temple.” The Lord’s heavenly palace, rather
than the earthly temple, is probably in view here (see Ps 11:4;
Mic 1:2-3). The Hebrew word ׁש ֶקדֹ) qodesh, “holy”) here refers
to the sovereign transcendence associated with his palace. 14 tn Or “Be quiet before him, all the earth!” 15 tn The Hebrew text adds תֹנוֹי ְג ִ ׁש ל ַע‘) al shigyonot, “upon
[or, “according to”] shigyonot”). The meaning of this word is
uncertain. It may refer to the literary genre of the prayer or
to the musical style to be employed when it is sung. The NEB
leaves the term untranslated; several other modern English
versions transliterate the term into English, sometimes with
explanatory notes (NASB, NRSV “according to Shigionoth”; 
NIV “On shigyonoth”). 16 tn Heb “your report,” that is, “the report concerning
you.”
17 tn Heb “I fear.” Some prefer to read, “I saw, Lord, what
you accomplished” (cf. NEB). 18 tn Heb “your work.” 19 tn Heb “in the midst of years.” The meaning of the
phrase, which occurs only here in the OT, is uncertain (cf. NIV
“in our day”; NEB, NASB “in the midst of the years”).
20 tn Heb “revive it” (i.e., “your work”). 21 tn Heb “make known.” The implied object is “your
deeds”; the pronoun “them,” referring to “deeds” in the previous line, was employed in the translation to avoid redundancy. The suffix on the form ּיהוֵּי ַח) khayyehu, “revive it”) does
double duty in the parallelism. 22 tn Heb “in turmoil remember [to show] compassion.” 23 tn In vv. 3-15 there is a mixture of eleven prefixed verbal forms (without vav [ו [consecutive or with vav conjunctive), sixteen suffixed forms, and three prefixed forms with 
vav consecutive. All of the forms are best taken as indicating completed action from the speaker’s standpoint (all of the
prefixed forms being regarded as preterites). The forms could 
be translated with the past tense, but this would be misleading, forthis is not a mere recital of God’s deeds in Israel’s past
history. Habakkuk here describes, in terms reminiscent of
past theophanies, his prophetic vision of a future theophany
(see v. 7, “I saw”). From the prophet’s visionary standpoint 
the theophany is “as good as done.” This translation uses the
English present tense throughout these verses to avoid misunderstanding. A similar strategy is followed by the NEB; in
contrast note the NIV and NRSV, which consistently use past 
tenses throughout the section, and the NASB, which employs 
present tenses in vv. 3-5 and mostly past tenses in vv. 6-15. 24 sn Teman was a city or region in southern Edom.
habakkuk 2:17 1774
the sovereign
 one from Mount Paran.
Selah.

His splendor covers the skies,
his glory
 fills the earth.
3:4 He is as bright as lightning;
a two-pronged lightning bolt flashes from 
his hand.
This is the outward display of his power.
3:5 Plague goes before him;
pestilence
 marches right behind him.10
3:6 He takes his battle position11 and 
shakes12 the earth;
with a mere look he frightens13 the na- tions.
The ancient mountains disintegrate;14
the primeval hills are flattened.
He travels on the ancient roads.15
3:7 I see the tents of Cushan overwhelmed 
by trouble;16
 tn Or traditionally, “holy one.” The term ׁשֹדו ָק) qadosh,
“holy [one]”) here refers to God’s sovereignty. See v. 3b.
 sn The precise location of Mount Paran is unknown, but
like Teman it was located to the southeast of Israel. Habakkuk saw God marching from the direction of Sinai.
 tn Selah. The meaning of this musical term (which also
appears in vv. 9, 13, and in the Psalms as well) is unknown.  tn Or “heavens.”  tn Heb “praise.” This could mean that the earth responds
in praise as God’s splendor is observed in the skies. However,
the Hebrew term ה ָּל ִה ְּת) tÿhillah, “praise”) can stand by metonymy for what prompts it (i.e., fame, glory, deeds).  tn Heb “[His] radiance is like light.” Some see a reference 
to sunlight, but the Hebrew word רֹאו‘) or) here refers to lightning, as the context indicates (see vv. 4b, 9, 11). The word 
also refers to lightning in Job 36:32 and 37:3, 11, 15.
 tn Heb “two horns from his hand to him.” Sharp, pointed 
lightning bolts have a “horn-like” appearance. The weapon
of “double lightning” appears often in Mesopotamian representations of gods. See Elizabeth Van Buren, Symbols of the 
Gods in Mesopotamian Art (AnOr), 70-73.  tn Heb “and there [is] the covering of his strength”; or
“and there is his strong covering.” The meaning of this line
is unclear. The point may be that the lightning bolts are merely a covering, or outward display, of God’s raw power. In Job
36:32 one reads that God “covers his hands with light [or,
“lightning”].”
 tn Because of parallelism with the previous line, the
meaning “pestilence” is favored for ף ֶ ׁש ֶר) reshef) here, but usage elsewhere suggests a destructive bolt of fire may be in 
view. See BDB 958 s.v. 
sn There are mythological echoes here, for in Canaanite literature the god Resheph aids Baal in his battles. See J. Day, 
“New Light on the Mythological Background of the Allusion to 
Resheph in Habakkuk III 5,” VT 29 (1979): 353-55. 10 tn Heb “goes out at his feet.” 11 tn Heb “he stands.” 12 tn This verb has been traditionally understood as “measure” (from דּמו, mud), but the immediately following context 
(vv. 6b-7) favors the meaning “shake” from וד ָמ) mavd; see
HALOT 555 s.v.). 13 tn Heb “makes [the nations] jump [in fear].” 14 tn Or “crumbled,” broke into pieces.” 15 tn Heb “ancient ways [or, “doings”] are his.” The meaning of this line is unclear. Traditionally it has been translated,
“his ways are eternal.” However, in this context (see vv. 3, 7) it 
is more likely that the line speaks of the Lord taking the same
route as in the days of Moses and Deborah (see Deut 33:2;
Judg 5:4). See J. J. M. Roberts, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (OTL), 154. 16 tn Heb “under trouble I saw the tents of Cushan.”
sn Cushan was located in southern Transjordan.
the tent curtains of the land of Midian are 
shaking.17
3:8 Is the Lord mad at the rivers?
Are you angry with the rivers?
Are you enraged at the sea?18
Is this why19 you climb into your horsedrawn chariots,20
your victorious chariots?21
3:9 Your bow is ready for action;22
you commission your arrows.23 Selah. You cause flash floods on the earth’s sur- face.24
3:10 When the mountains see you, they 
shake.
The torrential downpour sweeps 
through.25
The great deep26 shouts out;
it lifts its hands high.27
3:11 The sun and moon stand still in their 
courses;28
the flash of your arrows drives them 
away,29
the bright light of your lightning-quick 
spear.30
3:12 You furiously stomp on the earth,
17 tn R. D. Patterson takes ןֶוֲא ת ַח ַּת) takhat ’aven) in the
first line as a place name, “Tahath-Aven.” (Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah [WEC], 237.) In this case one may translate 
the verse as a tricolon: “I look at Tahath-Aven. The tents of
Cushan are shaking, the tent curtains of the land of Midian.”
18 sn The following context suggests these questions 
should be answered, “Yes.” The rivers and the sea, symbolizing here the hostile nations (v. 12), are objects of the Lord’s 
anger (vv. 10, 15). 19 tn Heb “so that.” Here י ִּכ) ki) is resultative. See the note 
on the phrase “make it” in 2:18. 20 tn Heb “you mount your horses.” As the next line makes 
clear, the Lord is pictured here as a charioteer, not a cavalryman. Note NRSV here, “when you drove your horses, // your 
chariots to victory.” 21 tn Or “chariots of deliverance.” 22 tn Heb “[into] nakedness your bow is laid bare.” 23 tn Heb “sworn in are the arrow-shafts with a word.” The
passive participle of ע ַב ָ ׁש) shava’), “swear an oath,” also occurs in Ezek 21:23 ET (21:28 HT) referencing those who have
sworn allegiance. Here the Lord’s arrows are personified and 
viewed as having received a commission which they have
vowed to uphold. In Jer 47:6-7 the Lord’s sword is given such
a charge. In the Ugaritic myths Baal’s weapons are formally 
assigned the task of killing the sea god Yam. 24 tn Heb “[with] rivers you split open the earth.” A literal
rendering like “You split the earth with rivers” (so NIV, NRSV) 
suggests geological activity to the modern reader, but in the
present context of a violent thunderstorm, the idea of streams 
swollen to torrents by downpours better fits the imagery.
sn As the Lord comes in a thunderstorm the downpour
causes streams to swell to river-like proportions and spread
over the surface of the ground, causing flash floods. 25 tn Heb “a heavy rain of waters passes by.” Perhaps the
flash floods produced by the downpour are in view here.
26 sn The great deep, which is to be equated with the sea
(vv. 8, 15), is a symbol of chaos and represents the Lord’s 
enemies.
27 sn Lifting the hands here suggests panic and is accompanied by a cry for mercy (see Ps 28:2; Lam 2:19). The forces 
of chaos cannot withstand the Lord’s power revealed in the 
storm.
28 tn Heb “in their lofty dwelling places.” 29 tn Or “at the light of your arrows they vanish.” 30 tn Heb “at the brightness of the lightning of your spear.”
1775 habakkuk 3:12
you angrily trample down the nations.
3:13 You march out to deliver your 
people,
to deliver your special servant.
You strike the leader of the wicked na- tion,
laying him open from the lower body to 
the neck. Selah. 3:14 You pierce the heads of his warriors
with a spear.
They storm forward to scatter us;
they shout with joy as if they were plun- dering the poor with no opposition.
3:15 But you trample on the sea with your 
horses,
on the surging, raging waters.
Habakkuk Declares His Confidence
3:16 I listened and my stomach churned;
the sound made my lips quiver.
My frame went limp, as if my bones were 
decaying,10
and I shook as I tried to walk.11
 tn Heb “anointed one.” In light of the parallelism with
“your people” in the preceding line this could refer to Israel,
but elsewhere the Lord’s anointed one is always an individual. The Davidic king is the more likely referent here.  tn Heb “you strike the head from the house of wickedness.”
 tn Heb “laying bare [from] foundation to neck.”  tn Some take “warriors” with the following line, in which 
case one should translate, “you pierce [his] head with a
spear; his warriors storm forward to scatter us” (cf. NIV). The
meaning of the Hebrew term ֹזו ָר ְּפ) pÿrazo), translated here
“his warriors,” is uncertain.  tc Heb “his shafts.” Some emend to “your shafts.” The 
translation above assumes an emendation to ה ֶּט ַמ) matteh,
“shaft, spear”), the vav-yod (ו-י (sequence being a corruption
of an original he (ה(.  tn Heb “me,” but the author speaks as a representative
of God’s people.  tn Heb “their rejoicing is like devouring the poor in secret.”
 tn Heb “the foaming of the mighty [or “many”] waters.”  tn Heb “my insides trembled.” 10 tn Heb “decay entered my bones.” 11 tc Heb “beneath me I shook, which….” The Hebrew term
I long12 for the day of distress
to come upon13 the people who attack us.
3:17 When14 the fig tree does not bud,
and there are no grapes on the vines;
when the olive trees do not produce,15
and the fields yield no crops;16
when the sheep disappear17 from the pen,
and there are no cattle in the stalls,
3:18 I will rejoice because of18 the Lord;
I will be happy because of the God who 
delivers me!
3:19 The sovereign Lord is my source of 
strength.19
He gives me the agility of a deer;20
he enables me to negotiate the rugged 
terrain.21
(This prayer is for the song leader. It is to be 
accompanied by stringed instruments.)22